Cambridge Analytica & Facebook Scandal- What happened in the US Elections?


Introduction

Nowadays, social networking is easiest way to stay close to each other. Being a Billion Dollar industry now it helps to connect to your friends and family so easily but back then when it doesn’t exist it wasn’t the case. 
It all began from 1997 when the first recognized site six degrees was created. Since then many companies had been in the market like Facebook, Instagram, WhatsApp, WeChat, Snapchat, etc. Out of all these companies biggest is the Facebook, 
it was made in a hostel room in Harvard University by Mark Zuckerberg, Eduardo Saverin, Dustin Moskovitz, and Chris Hughes. It reached 1 Billion mark in 2012 and became the largest Social networking site in the world. 
Facebook has 2.41 Billion active monthly users until March’19, making it the biggest social networking site on Internet. In the journey of these 15 years 
Facebook has gone into many upgrades and development into their website like they have introduced to share videos, now you can sell your stuff on Facebook and many other upgrades. Facebook has also recently acquired Instagram and WhatsApp, 
after which the users any of the three services owned by Facebook Inc. has reached to 2.7 Billion.
Serving about 1/3rd of the population of this world Facebook has the power to influence a lot of people through its platform and in many ways, it has influenced people towards a greater benefit of an individual or a group. 
Cambridge Analytica was a company formed under the parent company called SCL, having offices round the world it was a British Company that was Political Consultation Firm and Co-founded by Steve Bannon. 
The company closed all its operations in 2018 after it was accused of breaching into facebook policy and deceiving them 


Literature Survey

According to an article by business Live says that in a survey done by ‘CIGI-Iposes Global’ 86 percent people have fooled by fake news at least once and 44 percent people said that they frequently fall for the fake news, 
also they said that 40 percent of British and 35 percent Polish believe that Russia is held responsible in originating fake news in their own country. On an average about 66% people get to the news from Facebook. 
It is so much filled with fake news that in 2019 the top 100 news that were fake were viewed by over 200 million people says a journal survey conducted recently. 
A research paper published in 2019 ‘A survey on fake news and rumour detection techniques’ says that the interest 
in fake news and rumours have been the maximum in 2018 and the maximum number of the papers published on fake news and rumour were in 2018. According to Europol 32 percent of cyber-attacks include phishing.

The biggest of the fake news according to “The Washington post” that were on Facebook were viewed by more than 1 billion people was the news relating to 2016 US President Elections. News revolving around 
Donald Trump and his political party. As many of the questionnaire’s have been seen on Facebook that are being voted by hundreds of people, one such questionnaire was designed by Alexsandr Kogan who was 
indeed contracted by Cambridge Analytica, a British -based political consultancy firm, founded by Republican Party supporters including Mr. Steve Bannon who is now the strategist of Donald Trump. 
The quiz was taken by around 350 million people and Mr. Bannon and Cambridge Analytica used that information for psychological profiling of US voters. The team used that data and helped Donald Trump 
win by 40,000 votes in three states. The data about the voters that was pulled from the Kogan’s app helped the party to know about their interests and created targeted ads, images and messaging helping 
them to connect with the candidate.Another instance is of the ads bought by Russians that were promoting Donald Trump and derogating Hillary Clinton, many of them include that black population shouldn’t 
vote Hillary Clinton. More than 12 million people viewed the posts owned by Russians, 440,000 users of Facebook saw the ads just before the election day. Brad Parscale another name in Trump’s campaign 
manages Trump’s Ads and digital campaigns, about 80% of the budget was spent on Ads on Facebook for Trump’s campaign which created thousands of iterations of tweaked ads which were used test which sales 
pitch is more effective. Also, Facebook staff has also worked alongside Trump’s team to help them to gather information to increase donations and Trump’s reach through Facebook’s tools.



List of participants and their actions
Under this list there will be 3 types of participants
•	Primary Participants- the main participants who have taken actions or specific actions
•	Secondary participants- who are not the main participants but are directly affected by the actions of primary participants
•	Implied Participants- Who are not directly connected to scenario but have been affected by the actions of the participants involved.

Primary participants
	Donald Trump
He led the government to his elections against Hillary and he provided permission to the Steve Bannon and Brad Pascale to deliver biased the news on Facebook and use that for his winning He made Steve bought in the company Cambridge Analytica


	Alexsandr Kogan
He was a data scientist at Cambridge university and was contracted by the Cambridge Analytica for sake of Trump’s win He developed created the app and different questionnaires that attracted data of about 320 million people.


	Cambridge Analytica
It is a British – based political consultancy firm that breached through the personal data of millions of people without their consent and stored their data for political use in 2016 US General Elections


	Brad Parscale
He was the campaign manager of the Trump’s party who created thousands of tweaked ads to check which is more effective


	Russian hackers
Bought thousands of ads that favored Trump and derogated Clinton


Secondary participants

	Hillary Clinton
She was the leader of the opposition party named Democratic and won the popular vote but lost the election in many states by very less margin


	Facebook 
Facebook having 2.8 billion users was the platform through which Cambridge Analytica breached millions of user details. Facebook lost integrity due to data breaching and was devastated by everyone for not securing user’s data.

 
	Facebook Users
All the users of 2.8 billion people who lost their personal details without their consent


Implied participants

	Voters- who got misguided due to the posts or the ads on Facebook

Reduction
In 2016 US general elections many of the data of users of Facebook was used to campaign senator from Texas Ted Cruz and then for the campaign of Donald Trump that was 
led by a single firm named Cambridge Analytica co owned by Steve Bannon who was the strategist for Donald Trump and a scientist Alexsandr Kogan. He created an app that
breaches data through Facebook of people who took the app and friends of those people creating a huge data of the voters at that time. Around 320 million people’s private 
data was leaked and harvested by Cambridge Analytica and used that data for political interests. This breach of data helped Trump to win in 3 states with a small margin of
around 40,000 votes and helped him won the election against Clinton and Brad Parscale confirms it very clearly that Trump’s party took use of Facebook to reach out to people 
In 2018 it was discovered that Cambridge Analytica has harvested data of millions of users of Facebook without the consent of people and used that data for various political 
purposes. Facebook banned Cambridge Analytica from using its platform as it breached the trust.
The Russian hackers mainly associated with the Internet research Agency bought ads on Facebook that was providing biased information about Trump and derogating Clinton.
Over 10 million people viewed those ads and around 440,000 viewed it just a day before election
 
Taking account of all the data breaches and ads manipulation that were done in the election to determine the outcome, Facebook was unaware of the data breach until it revealed in 
2018 about the case and banned Cambridge Analytica. Upon assumptions it can be said that Cambridge Analytica was wrong on its part to store data of millions of users and use that 
for political use without seeking any permission from the platform they were using or the user. On the other hand, the Russian hackers are also held responsible for spreading biased
news or information in favor of Donald Trump which played a part in changing minds of a great number of individuals towards Trump. As a result of these assumptions Cambridge Analytica 
is held responsible for storing data and breaching Facebook’s policy to retrieve the user details and using them without any approval.


Legal Considerations
Using Facebook as a platform to breach data of users and posting fake and biased news or information leads to many legal considerations.
Cambridge Analytica harvested user data from Facebook without their consent breaching privacy of an individual and Russian hackers produced
fake and biased news that are a type of a propaganda that consists of false or hoax information which is unethical 
On the other hand, Facebook was fined half a million pounds for lack of transparency and failing to protect user data according to ‘Data Protection Act’.
Facebook’s company policy was breached by a firm and 87 million people lost their private data, facebook must have a policy to secure its user’s data which
they failed. The Federal Trade Commission imposed 5 billion against facebook and sue Cambridge Analytica, as the firm has stopped their operations since 2018.
Facebook is also questioned on many privacy breaches including the Cambridge Analytica scandal and 6.8 million photos of users being improperly accessed by third party applications. 
Facebook has combined with 43 fact-checking companies across the globe to help them defend their user’s data in future 


Possible participants options
Before gathering data of millions of users Cambridge Analytica must have the option to ask for the permission to store the data which they didn’t asked as they took huge 
benefit of Facebook’s company policy. If they asked for the permission, chances were that they didn’t get the permission to save the data, but this can save their unethical move
Facebook have the option to investigate the data protection policy with more seriousness as if they investigated that, then all of this can be saved, and it would be more ethical. 
Facebook also had the option to introduce its platform with tools that can detect the information’s authenticity and filter the fake or biased news which would be a more ethical way.


Justifications to participants Actions
 
In the case of Cambridge Analytica, they breached data from Facebook, all this they did because of the poor Data protection 
policy by Facebook that helped them harvested millions of user data. Cambridge Analytica simply followed a path to get the 
data because they want that data to infer the Us elections and referendum. They had their way clear to extract data from Facebook,
the possible justification to this would be that they were just a data mining company that was hired to extract data and they did exactly what they were asked for.
In the case of Facebook at the first place they didn’t knew about the data breach but once they came to know about that. 
In 2018 they banned Cambridge Analytica and agreed to pay the fine also they engaged in tools and combining with different fact-checking organizations to remove fake news.




Code of ethics
This Scenario explained in the above case study on Cambridge Analytica Data Mining to use in US general elections. 
This case study has been written solely on the basis of the content available on the web and facts proposed by 
different newspapers and journals that are renowned. This essay has been written honestly and is not written to harm any one or to offend others. 



Optimistic Side 
The Optimistic side if you look at the case study was that a company as stolen millions of private data from 
another company to benefit an individual or group of individuals. If having a data of millions of users things 
can go worse than the issue but it didn’t went that bad and things are now in control Cambridge Analytica is 
banned to advertise on facebook and facebook has payed the fine for their fault.

Pessimistic Side
The pessimistic side on this case study would be that the election in Us were not healthy as external unethical 
ways were used to change the outcome of the referendum and the elections. This side is not ethical for the people 
in the US as several methods were used to mind wash the people to change their decision and change the outcome of the elections.


Conclusion
The conclusion of the whole case study was that a British owned political consultation firm breached through a social
platform named facebook taking away 87 million user data and using that data for the US general elections in favor of 
Donald Trump to win the elections. On the other hand, Donald Trump was getting support from Russian hackers as well as
the bought thousands of ads on Facebook that were biased and fake and turned minds of many people. The result of the 
US general elections came out with a result as Trump elected for the President. After 2 years in 2018 when Facebook 
came to know about the Cambridge Analytica the immediately banned Cambridge Analytica using their platform and also 
payed 500,000 as penalty given by UK courts and the Federal Trade Commission penalized Facebook for 5 billion.
In the end what Cambridge Analytica and Kogan did was wrong and unethical on their part also Facebook was wrong
on their part as well, as they are more responsible for not securing data of millions of users and not changing 
their company’s policy and indeed Facebook got more criticism for that. This case study aims at how important it 
is for companies like Facebook to keep changing their policy in order to maintain their position. 











References
[1]https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cambridge_Analytica
[2]https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Facebook%E2%80%93Cambridge_Analytica_data_scandal
[3]https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/10/facebook-fake-news-election-conspiracy-theories
[4]https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0020025519304372

[5]https://techcrunch.com/2019/10/30/facebook-agrees-to-pay-uk-data-watchdogs-cambridge-analytica-fine-but-settles-without-admitting-liability/
[6]https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2018/10/01/how-russia-helped-to-swing-the-election-for-trump
[7]https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2018/jul/11/facebook-fined-for-data-breaches-in-cambridge-analytica-scandal
[8]https://www.business-live.co.uk/technology/how-fake-news-cyber-crime-17101136
[9]https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2018/12/19/dc-attorney-general-sues-facebook-over-alleged-privacy-violations-cambridge-analytica-scandal/
[10]https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/politics/wp/2018/03/22/all-the-ways-trumps-campaign-was-aided-by-facebook-ranked-by-importance/
[11]https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-47779782
